---
title: "Hands off that resource, HTTP status code 401 vs 403 vs 404"
series: Choosing HTTP status codes
series_number: 2
date: 2021-05-05
author: Arnaud Lauret
layout: post
category: post
alias: hands-off-that-resource
permalink: /hands-off-that-resource-http-status-code-401-vs-403-vs-404/
tools:
    - Web Concepts
---

{% include _postincludes/choosing-http-status-codes.md style="intro" %} This second post answers the following question: given that resource with id 123 actually exists in the underlying database, what should be the response to `GET /resources/123` when consumer is not allowed to access it? {% include http-status-code.html code="401" %}, {% include http-status-code.html code="403" %} or {% include http-status-code.html code="404" %}?

<!--more-->

{%- include _postincludes/choosing-http-status-codes.md -%}

# The context

Let's say you're creating an API for a mobile application that allows people to record phone calls.
Once calls are recorded, users can list them and listen to each individual recording.
Listing a user's recorded calls could be done with a `{% raw %}GET /users/{phoneNumber}/calls{% endraw %}`, for each phone call listed you get a random and unpredictable `id` that can be used to retrieve the actual audio recording with a `{% raw %}GET /calls/{callId}{% endraw %}`.

Basically it means that when a user whose phone number is `123456789` uses the mobile application, the application sends a `{% raw %}GET /users/123456789/calls{% endraw %}` API request to list available recorded calls.
The API responds with a {% include http-status-code.html code="200" %} along with the recorded calls belonging to user.
If user taps on one conversation which id is `Bnwgab`, the application sends a `{% raw %}GET /calls/Bnwgab{% endraw %}` and the API responds with a {% include http-status-code.html code="200" %} along with the audio file

But what happens if some curious and maybe malicious user scan network traffic coming out of the application?
This hacker will easily understand how this "not so private" API works.
With very little effort, they will succeed to generate phone numbers that actually exist in the underlying system so send `{% raw %}GET /users/{phone number of another user}/calls{% endraw %}` requests.
And with more effort, enough patience and adapted tools they may even generate valid random some `callId` and send `{% raw %}GET /calls/{callId that don't belong to their user account}{% endraw %}` requests.

In either case, the API should prevent accessing resources that don't belong to the caller and signify there's a problem with caller's request.
Note that if that sounds like a no-brainer for many people, that is actually not always the case and some APIs may return a {% include http-status-code.html code="200" %} along with the requested data.
Regularly, stories such as [this one](https://techcrunch.com/2021/03/09/iphone-thousands-calls-exposed/) (which inspired the above use case) come out.
Never forget that when creating APIs and never refrain from double check that your colleagues are also aware of that.
And note also that using PII (Personnally Identifiable Information) or other sensitive data as ids can be very convenient but raises security concerns, especially if they appear in URLs as they can be logged almost everywhere.
I should write a post series about API security one day (`POST /writing-ideas` done!).

Let's get back to what we are talking about today: HTTP status codes.
Obviously, when consumer make an API call on resource that actually exists but don't belong to them, the API must respond with a {% include http-status-code.html code="4xx" %}, but which one could be the more accurate?

{% include image.html source="twitter-poll.png" alt="Twitter poll results" %}

According to my [Twitter poll](https://twitter.com/apihandyman/status/1382712503717728257?s=21), 54% of people would return a {% include http-status-code.html code="403" %}, while 24% would return a {% include http-status-code.html code="404" %} and also 24% would return a {% include http-status-code.html code="401" %}.
Let's see who is right and who is wrong based on what RFCs say.

# Use 404 when resource is none of consumer's business (and never will)

{% include http-status-code.html code="404" style="quote" %}

Returning a {% include http-status-code.html code="404" %} means "the requested resource does not exists".
Actually, there's a subtlety, it could mean "the requested resource actually exists but it's none of your business, you're not allowed to access it and never will; actually, it does not exist for you" or "the requested resource does not exist at all" but the consumer will never know what is the true reason behind this HTTP status code.

That response is the best one for the introduction's use case, granted that users want to use this application without sharing anything with others.
In that case, given that John and Emma use the application, if Emma "hacks" the API, we will never ever want her to know that `{% raw %}/users/{John's phone number}/calls{% endraw %}` may exists.
Because they are not supposed to know it exists and even though can't do anything about it, so better tell her that it "doesn't exist" (for her).

But if {% include http-status-code.html code="404" %} is usually my first idea when a consumer tries to access to a `{%raw%}/resources/1234{%endraw%}` they shouldn't (I admit I'm a little obsess with security and prone to not show what is not needed to be shown), there are cases where it could be interesting to let them know the target resource exists.

# Use 403 when consumer can do something about it

{% include http-status-code.html code="403" style="quote" %}

Returning a {% include http-status-code.html code="403" %} signifies "the requested resource actually MAY exists but you cannot access it. You MAY access it by requesting adequate rights to someone, maybe an administrator for instance".

Even if that is not very realistic, let's say that the example application/API described in the introduction allows users to share recorded conversations with others. Given John has shared his conversations with Emma but not with Tara, Emma triggering a `{% raw %}GET /users/{John's phone number}/calls{% endraw %}` API call will get a {% include http-status-code.html code="200" %} while Tara will get a {% include http-status-code.html code="403" %}. Tara may request John the rights to access his conversations to fix that.

We have talk about {% include http-status-code.html code="403" %} and {% include http-status-code.html code="404" %}, but what about the poll's third option?

# Never ever use 401 (don't be fooled by its reason)

{% include http-status-code.html code="401" style="quote" %}

As 24% of respondents to my poll, when a consumers tries to access a resource they shouldn't access, you may be tempted to return a {% include http-status-code.html code="401" %} instead of a {% include http-status-code.html code="403" %}.
Why would you do that?
Maybe because its reason phrase says {% include http-status-code.html code="401" style="reason"%}.
But that would actually be an error, don't be fooled by that reason phrase.

{% include quote.html 
    author="Phil Karlton"
    url="https://www.karlton.org/2017/12/naming-things-hard/"
    text="There are only two hard things in Computer Science: cache invalidation and naming things." %}

There's a huge problem with {% include http-status-code.html code="401" %}, its reason phrase let think that it is tied to "wrong authorization" while it is actually tied to "lack of authentication".
Actually the RFC that defines it is {% include http-status-code.html code="401" style="rfcfull" %}... "Authentication" and not "Authorization".
Even the description states that this status is about "authentication credentials".

A {% include http-status-code.html code="401" style="code"%} signifies there's a problem with your credentials which usually are provided in an `Authorization` header (still wrong name, but at least it's consistent with the reason).
This status is made to signify "you forgot to provide an Authorization header with some credentials" or "your credentials provided in the Authorization header are invalid/expired".
In the API world, it basically says "You can't use the API at all, come back with a valid access token".

It's not meant to say "You can use the API but not access that resource", that is the job of {% include http-status-code.html code="403" %}.
And that is clearly stated in its description in {% include http-status-code.html code="403" style="rfcfull" %}:

{% include quote.html
   text="If authentication credentials were provided in the request, the server considers them insufficient to grant access.  The client SHOULD NOT automatically repeat the request with the same credentials.  The client MAY repeat the request with new or different credentials.  However, a request might be forbidden for reasons unrelated to the credentials."   
%}

To be even more sure that {%include http-status-code.html code="403" %} is the right answer, let's talk about Oauth 2 scopes.
Indeed, dealing with resource rights access is not always, let's say "internal business rule" driven (checking in users table that the identified user has the requested phone number for example).
When consumers request an access token using the Oauth 2 framework (the token that goes into the not so well named `Authorization` header), they may request a token restricted to given elements thanks to scopes.
For instance, when using the Github API, you may request access to public repo only or to user data only.
What should happen when a consumer requests access to a resource without adapted scopes?
[Section 3.1 of RFC 6750 The OAuth 2.0 Authorization Framework: Bearer Token Usage](https://tools.ietf.org/html/rfc6750#section-3.1) is quite clear:

{% include quote.html
    text="The request requires higher privileges than provided by the access token.  The resource server SHOULD respond with the HTTP 403 (Forbidden) status code and MAY include the \"scope\" attribute with the scope necessary to access the protected resource."
    source="insufficient_scope error"
%}

# HTTP Status code is not enough

That means two things.
First {%include http-status-code.html code="401" %} is definitely not an option in the case we are studying today.
Second, HTTP status code is not enough.
Indeed, {%include http-status-code.html code="403" %} could be returned because consumer lacks some scope to `{%raw%}GET /resources/{resourceId}{%endraw%}` in general or does not comply to some business rule and cannot `GET /resource/1234` (a specific id).
Providing a message and maybe some structured data to explained the why of the error and how it can be solved (request access token with scope X in first case or contact some admin in second case) is mandatory.
Note that, this made me realized that {%include http-status-code.html code="403" %} does not actually disclose that a resource exists, it totally depends on what is said beyond the HTTP status code.

# Don't forget DX and context

Respecting HTTP and other RFCs is important to avoid surprising developers with behaviors that are against common practices, but most important, whatever the HTTP status code you'll choose to return, what matters above all is providing the response the most adapted for the context that will actually help the developer (and the consumer and even the end user) to know what is actually happening and help them solve the problem if they can.

So, when consumers want to access a resource they shouldn't, don't return a {%include http-status-code.html code="401" %}, you would go against the HTTP protocol.
Instead, return a {%include http-status-code.html code="404" %} if consumers can't do anything about it (so from their perspective, it does not exist) and return a {%include http-status-code.html code="403" %} along with a meaningful message if they can request access.
