---
title: "This is not the HTTP method you're looking for, HTTP status code 404 vs 405 vs 501"
series: Choosing HTTP status codes
series_number: 1
date: 2021-04-21
author: Arnaud Lauret
layout: post
category: post
permalink: /this-is-not-the-http-method-you-re-looking-for-http-status-code-404-vs-405-vs-501/
tags:
    - HTTP Status Codes
tools:
    - Web Concepts
---

When designing APIs, choosing HTTP status codes is not always that obvious and prone to errors, I hope this post series will help you to avoid common mistakes and choose an adapted one according to the context.
This first post answers the following question: given that a `GET /resources/123` request returns a `200 OK`, what should be the response to `DELETE /resources/123` if `DELETE` method is not implemented? `404 Not Found`, `405 Method Not Allowed` or `501 Not Implemented`?

<!--more-->

{%- include _postincludes/choosing-http-status-codes.md -%}

# The context

In my {% include post-link.html alias="postman-csv-demo" %} post, I used the Github REST API and discovered it was impossible to delete an issue on a repository with a {% raw %}`DELETE /{user}/{repository}/issues/{issueId}`{% endraw %} request simply because it was not implemented.
Unfortunately, the Github API warned me with a quite awkward `404 Not Found` though a {% raw %}`GET`{% endraw %} on the very same issue returned a `200 OK` that tells "this issue exists".
That's quite a contradiction.

{% include image.html source="twitter-poll.png" alt="Twitter poll results"%}

According to a Twitter poll I made, a few voters (10%) agreed with Github REST API's `404 Not Found` response, most people (56%) would use a `405 Method Not Allowed`, but a significant amount (34%) would use `501 Not Implemented`.
Let's see which HTTP status code(s) can be used when a resource actually exists but the method provided in the request is not available.

# Use 405 Method Not Allowed when method isn't defined in contract

{% include http-status-code.html code="405" style="quote" %}

A `405` is a `4xx` class status code, which means it's client's fault.
Receiving such a response means the client sent to the origin server a request with a method that is not allowed/supported by the target resource.
Let's rephrase that definition in the context of an API:
a consumer will get a `405 Method Not Allowed` response when sending a request with a method which is not explicitly mentioned in in the contract or documentation on the target resource.
For instance, that means if the API's contract or documentation states the only method supported by a resource `/resource` is `GET`, a consumer sending a request on this resource using any other method, like `DELETE /resource` for instance, will get a `405 Method Not Allowed` response.

Therefore, the `405` status code is the one I would have expected from the Github REST API when I tried to delete an issue.
Indeed, the API's documentation describing the API's contract of the issue resource ({% raw %}`/{user}/{repository}/issues/{issueId}`{% endraw %}) only mentions `GET` and I sent `DELETE`.
It's clearly my fault, though it's quite surprising to NOT be able to delete an issue (but that's another story).

A {% include http-status-code.html code="405" style="with reason" %} is the right choice when the method is not defined in contract, but sending a "wrong" method is not always consumer's fault, that's where a {% include http-status-code.html code="501" style="with reason" %} could be interesting.

# Use 501 Not Implemented when partially implementing a "standard"

{% include http-status-code.html code="501" style="quote" %}

A `5xx` class error means the server is at fault.
A {% include http-status-code.html code="501" style="with reason" %} basically says "we're deeply sorry but `METHOD` has not been implemented on this resource and maybe has not been implemented at all on any resource".

Sending a `TOTALLY-UNKNOWN-METHOD /whatever-resource` could result in getting a `501` if the method does not match any [generally known one](https://webconcepts.info/concepts/http-method/), but in that case I would prefer to return a {% include http-status-code.html code="405" style="with reason" %} as it's not the server's fault if the consumer really sent a bullshit method in its request and must send an acceptable one.

But, imagine you are implementing a "more or less standard" interface contract.
It could be because you work in a regulated industry like banking or an highly inter-connected one like travel or logistics.
It could be because you want to implement a protocol such as WebDAV, which is a extended version of HTTP adding new methods.
It could also be simply because inside your company several components have to share a common interface in order to facilitate communication.

Imagine now that standard contract you need to implement says consumer can use `GET` and `PUT` on `/resource` but you only implement `GET` in your version 1 for whatever reasonable reason.
In that case, returning a `501 Not Implemented` would be the perfect answer as the "standard" contract says that `PUT /whatever-resource` is possible but it has not been implemented by the actual provider.

If a {% include http-status-code.html code="501" style="with reason" %} is a very good answer in such a context of partially implementing a "more or less standard" API, returning a {% include http-status-code.html code="404" style="with reason" %} is totally out of question in any HTTP method related error.

# Never use 404 Not Found when receiving wrong or unknown method

{% include http-status-code.html code="404" style="quote" %}

The Github REST API responded with a `{% include http-status-code.html code="404" style="with reason" %}` to my `DELETE /issue-resource-path` request.
According to {% include http-status-code.html code="404" style="rfc" %}, that tells the issue identified by the path doesn't exist (A) or Github is not willing to disclose that issue actually exists (B).
Unfortunately, both options were contradicted by the `GET /issue-resource-path` returning a `200 OK`.
Indeed, getting this `200` tells the issue actually exists (Not A) and Github is willing to disclose it exists (Not B).

And even if for any reason I was actually not able to see this issue (we'll talk about that in a later post) and so get a `404` on my `GET`, I still would prefer to get a `405` on my `DELETE`, that way I could have quickly know that whatever the issue I want to delete, I will never be able to delete it as it's not possible according to the API's contract.