---
title: "Empty list, HTTP status code 200 vs 204 vs 404"
series: Choosing HTTP status codes
series_number: 4
date: 2021-06-02
author: Arnaud Lauret
layout: post
category: post
permalink: /empty-lists-http-status-code-200-vs-204-vs-404/
tools:
    - Web Concepts
---

When designing APIs, choosing HTTP status codes is not always that obvious and prone to errors, I hope this post series will help you to avoid common mistakes and choose an adapted one according to the context.
This fourth post answers the following question: given that /users is a collection (a list) and no users are named Spock, what should return GET /users?name=spock? 
{% include http-status-code.html code="200" %}, {% include http-status-code.html code="204" %} or {% include http-status-code.html code="404" %}

<!--more-->

{%- include _postincludes/choosing-http-status-codes.md -%}

# The context

When you need to represent lists (aka collection resources) in a REST/RESTful/RESTish API, a usual design pattern is to represented with them a `/resources` (or `/resource`, read {% include post-link.html alias="resources-vs-resource" %}).
More often than not, you'll need to be able to return a subset of the list's elements.
To do so, a usual (if not standard) design pattern is to add query parameters to provide search filters.
If a `GET /users` is supposed to return a list containing all (actually accessible to the consumer and possibly to the end user) users, a `GET /users?name=spock` is supposed to return a list containing only the users whose name is `spock`.
The question we will answer today basically is: which HTTP status code respond with when returning an empty list.

{% include image.html source="twitter-poll.png" alt="Twitter poll results" %}

According to my Twitter pool, 51% of respondents would return a {% include http-status-code.html code="200" %}, while 24% would return a {% include http-status-code.html code="204" %} and 25% would return a {% include http-status-code.html code="404" %}.
Let's see what could be the correct answers according to RFC(s) and common practice.

# The obvious 200 OK

{% include http-status-code.html code="200" style="quote" %}

Let's start with the most common and valid response in such a case: {% include http-status-code.html code="200" %}.
When responding to `GET /users`, the API will respond with that HTTP status code along with a list of all (actually accessible to the consumer and possibly to the end user) users users.
When responding to `GET /users?name=smith`, the API will respond also that with HTTP status code along with a list contains all users named `smith`.
And finally when responding to `GET /users?name=spock` and if there are no user name `spock`, the API will respond yet another time with that HTTP status code but this time along with an empty list.
That is actually the most common response I have ever seen, probably because most people consider that the `/users` collection/list resource exists and `name` query param is used to filter the content of the list.

But there is a more specific HTTP status code that could do the trick too.

# The not so current 204

{% include http-status-code.html code="204" style="quote" %}

While {% include http-status-code.html code="200" %} being a valid and the most common answer, returning a {% include http-status-code.html code="204" %} could make sense as there is absolutely nothing to return.
It is indeed more often used when responding to a `PUT` (replace) or a `PATCH` (partial update), when servers don't want to bother returning the replaced/updated resource or on a `DELETE` because there is usually nothing to return after a deletion.
But it can be used on a `GET` too.
If the request is valid, has been successfully fulfilled and if there is no additional content to send (which is the case as the returned list would be empty),  {% include http-status-code.html code="204" %} is perfectly understandable and valid answer.

It's a valid response but I personally will not use it and do not recommend to use it in that case in my context.
Because it is not that common (based on my experience, it's not absolute truth) and may imply more work.
Actually, I try to avoid using specific/uncommon HTTP status when a more generic/common one works too, that usually simplifies consumer's job and also designer's one as there are less possible choices and behaviors (I'll write a post about that).
Though a consumer must be able to interpret any `2xx` as as success and fallback to treat it as {% include http-status-code.html code="200" %}, that means there will be no response body, so no empty list.
That could easily lead to to possible "null pointer exception" or any equivalent requiring more controls in code.
A {% include http-status-code.html code="200" %} with an empty list can be treated the same as non empty list without thinking about it.
Note that, consumer may obviously have to check il the list is empty or not to possibly show a message to end user, but the exact same code will work without that control.

But while simplifying choices, note that using that "simplified HTTP" stance, you'll loose some "HTTP semantic out of the box". 
Indeed tne major argument in favor of {% include http-status-code.html code="204" %} is that is allows to check empty search results (especially in logs) vs non empty ones without relying on specific response body's semantic.
That's quite an interesting feature.
Maybe we need more APIs actually fully using HTTP semantic to make this {% include http-status-code.html code="204" %} response more common and a no brainer.

So choosing between {% include http-status-code.html code="200" %} and {% include http-status-code.html code="204" %}, depends on you and your context.

# The not recommended 404

{% include http-status-code.html code="404" style="quote" %}

I just realized that's the fourth post in this series and {% include http-status-code.html code="404" %} has been involved in all posts so far.
Let's see what say the HTTP RFCs (with an s) about using it in that use case.

If we look at this status code definition in {% include http-status-code.html code="404" style="rfc" %} and if we consider that `/users` is the resource used even when doing a `GET /users?name=spock`, returning that HTTP status code makes no sense at all because the resource `/users` exists, it's just that the list it contains may be empty.

But is this definition of a resource identifier (excluding query parameters) is actually the correct one?
[Section 2 of RFC 7231](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7231#section-2) states _each resource is identified by a Uniform Resource Identifier (URI), as described in Section 2.7 of [RFC 7230](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc7230#section-2.7)_.
That section 2.7 of RFC 7230 says the "query" (what is between the first `?` and `#`) is a part of the resource identifier.
If we follow the link (it's quite a maze!) conducting to complete description of the query, we eventually arrive at [Section 3.4 of RFC 3986](https://datatracker.ietf.org/doc/html/rfc3986#section-3.4) that says _the query component contains non-hierarchical data that, along with data in the path component (Section 3.3), serves to identify a resource_.
That basically means that `/users?name=spock` is a resource identifier, so returning 404 is valid according to HTTP RFCs if we want to say "sorry no resource match the strict identifier provided in your query" or "there is no such a users list containing users named spock".
But using that HTTP status code being valid from a pure HTTP perspective, is it actually a good idea to use it in that use case?

In my humble opinion, based on my experience designing APIs, reading and listening to many API practitioners, analyzing many APIs and doing hundreds of API design reviews, I do not recommend to use it in that case because that would break a common practice.
In most REST/RESTful/RESTish APIs, a "resource identifier" is actually the resource path without the query part, that may be wrong when speaking strictly HTTP but that is the current state of common practice.
In most APIs, {% include http-status-code.html code="404" %} is strongly attached to "there is nothing for the requested path (excluding query parameters)".
It is returned in case involving `/path-that-does-not-exist` or `{% raw %}/collection/{id that does not exist}{% endraw %}` (see {% include post-link.html alias="hands-off-that-resource" %} or {% include post-link.html alias="no-resource-to-see-here" %}) but not for empty lists (that's usually a {% include http-status-code.html code="2xx" %}).
Also, returning a {% include http-status-code.html code="4xx" %} says that consumer made an error, is that really the case here?
I don't think so, the consumer just provided search filters that don't match any element in a list.

That's my reasoned opinion of not using {% include http-status-code.html code="404" %} for empty lists, but if you have valid reasons to use this HTTP status code for this use case, don't forget to be consistent and provide informative error feedback.
Indeed, if we take for granted that `GET /users?name=spock` returns a {% include http-status-code.html code="404" %} if there are no users named spock.
What about `GET /users` if there are no users at all? 
It should return the same HTTP status code.
And differentiating this it from a more common `/path-that-does-not-exist` will require to add some information in the response body to explain the actual cause of this response.

# DX above all

The lesson of today is that following the HTTP protocol is one thing but there are sometimes various options with pros and cons and sometimes being overly strict can lead to design that are less easy to understand.
The question is not about achieving the most perfect design (regarding HTTP) but just achieve a design that makes sense for most people involved and proposes the best as possible DX.
And that D in DX includes developers but also designers.
Simple design rules that makes sense for most are a key factor in your APIs success.